>> Funding for Frontline is
provided by:
The Park Foundation--
committed to raising public
awareness.
With major funding for News War
from the Richard and Rhoda
Goldman Foundation.
And additional funding from the
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
>> NARRATOR: Tonight on
Frontline...
>> The job of a reporter is to
be the curmudgeon who raises
questions that nobody else wants
to raise.
That's what the best reporters
try to do.
>> NARRATOR: Once upon a time,
they were thought of as heroes.
But today the entire news
industry is in crisis.
>> The public has a terrific
disdain for the press.
>> We have a press that is at
war with an administration while
our country is at war against
merciless enemies.
>> For 30 or more years, there
had been an assumption about the
government and the press, and
suddenly in the last couple of
years that's changed.
>> NARRATOR: In a four-part
special series, Frontline
reporter Lowell Bergman looks at
the challenges facing
journalists today...
>> Would you go to jail to
protect your source?
>> Absolutely.
>> NARRATOR: ...the war between
the White House and the press...
>> The President of the United
States saying, "If you publish
this story, you will have blood
on your hands."
>> NARRATOR: ...the explosion of
new and emerging media...
>> Do you ever feel like the
6:00 news just ain't cutting it
for you?
>> You don't see anybody between
20 and 30 getting their news
from the evening news.
You see them getting it online.
>> NARRATOR: ...and the economic
realities of today's news
business.
>> You have to make more every
year to keep the shareholders
happy.
>> NARRATOR: How did we get
here?
>> We're judging journalism by
the same standards that we apply
to entertainment.
That may be one of the greatest
tragedies in the history of
American journalism.
>> NARRATOR: And what is at
stake?
>> There is a dire need for
institutions that tell the
truth, that pursue the truth,
and that chase it at all cost.
>> NARRATOR: Tonight, part one
of News War, a Frontline special
series.
>> Go, go, go, go, go!
>> Over here!
>> NARRATOR: On July 6, 2005,
outside the D.C. Federal
District Court, a media swarm
gathered.
>> Back up a little.
Let's give him a little room.
Let's back up just a little.
>> NARRATOR: They were hounding
fellow journalists...
>> How important do you feel
about the First Amendment right
to the press?
>> NARRATOR: ...reporters who
were refusing to testify in the
investigation known as the Plame
Affair...
>> Do you have any comment at
all?
>> Sorry.
>> NARRATOR: ...a case that had
become the most significant
clash between the press and
federal government in decades.
>> What do we want?
>> Free press!
>> When do we want it?
>> Now!
>> This case did damage I think
to the First Amendment.
I think it did damage to the
individual careers of a number
of reporters.
I think it did damage to the
credibility of the media.
>> NARRATOR: There was no more
tangled business between the
Bush administration and the
press than the Plame affair.
The conflict that would raise
profound questions about
reporters' ability to protect
their confidential sources has
its roots in the
administration's march to war.
( gavel banging )
>> Mr. Speaker, the President of
the United States.
( cheers and applause )
>> NARRATOR: In January of 2003,
the Bush administration was
riding high.
In Afghanistan, America had
toppled the Taliban, and now the
President was preparing the
country for a new war.
>> A brutal dictator with a
history of reckless aggression,
with ties to terrorism, with
great potential wealth, will not
be permitted to dominate a vital
region and threaten the United
States.
( applause )
>> They were feeling a kind of
confidence.
They had a kind of hubris.
If you had to look at a few
months of this administration as
to maybe the perils of... of
overconfidence, you probably
would look at these few months.
>> Saddam has perfected the game
of cheat and retreat and is very
skilled in the art of denial and
deception.
>> NARRATOR: For several months,
there had been a steady drumbeat
to war.
>> What he wants is time and
more time to husband his
resources, to invest in his
ongoing chemical and biological
weapons program, and to gain
possession of nuclear weapons.
>> There was clearly a set
pattern of speeches, two or
three times a day, to reinforce
the W.M.D. thing.
>> NARRATOR: Walter Pincus is a
longtime national security
reporter for the "Washington
Post."
>> First, it was nuclear.
And then it was the idea that
they had chemical and
biological.
>> As we meet, chemists and
biologists and nuclear
scientists are toiling in
weapons labs and underground
bunkers, working to give the
world's most dangerous dictators
weapons of unprecedented power
and lethality.
>> Then it was the idea that
they would give it... give it to
the terrorists.
>> The man is a threat, Hutch,
I'm telling you.
He's a threat not only with what
he has, he's a threat with what
he's done.
He's a threat because he is
dealing with al-Qaeda.
>> It's just overwhelming the
advantage the government has
when it wants to sell a point of
view, and that's what they did.
>> NARRATOR: But the Bush
administration was also helped
by the nation's leading
newspapers.
>> It's important to understand
that the number of news
organizations that actually have
a national security reporter or
bureaus overseas and can
penetrate the intelligence
community are very limited.
And the New York Times is at the
top of that list.
So when the New York Times began
to have stories that supported
the administration's claims
about weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq, it had an
echo effect.
It had an echo effect that the
administration was conscious of
and employed.
>> What specifically has he
obtained...
>> We now know that you had
people talking to key reporters
doing these stories for the
Times.
>> There is a story in the New
York Times this morning...
this-- and I want to attribute
this to the Times -- I don't
want to talk about...
>> Those stories would appear
and then they would reference
the very material that they'd
given them and say, "See, this
is coming from the New York
Times, not just us."
>> The kinds of tubes that are
necessary to build a centrifuge.
And the centrifuge is required
to take low-grade uranium and...
and enhance it into highly-
enriched uranium.
>> It was kind of a loop, and it
was a conscious loop.
>> A lot of people wrote, you
know, stories that were overly
credulous.
>> NARRATOR: Bill Keller took
over as Executive Editor of the
New York Times after the run-up
to the Iraq war.
>> It wasn't some kind of sense
of overdeveloped patriotism or
eagerness on the part of
reporters to ingratiate
themselves with the White House.
What it was, was, you know,
reporters want to get on the
front page.
They want scoops.
>> It's a very hard area to
write about.
I was not alone.
Many other papers made the...
did the same kind of reporting
that I did.
I think because the New York
Times is the paper that it is
and I had written for so long
about it, I was...
>> INTERVIEWER: You were the
leader.
You were the expert in this
area.
>> I was the alleged expert.
There were other experts.
>> NARRATOR: Judith Miller was
one of the Times' lead reporters
on the W.M.D. story.
She had covered terrorism for
over a decade.
>> INTERVIEWER: You've said that
you may have gotten some of the
stories wrong because your
sources were wrong.
>> Right.
They gave me information that I
believe they believed.
It was information that was
given to the President.
The National Intelligence
Estimate went to the President.
Well, if the President was being
given this information, it was
the official intelligence
assessment of the United States
government and the intelligence
community.
I think... I believed that...
that they wouldn't give the
President false information.
>> She had the wrong sources.
And you can't... the excuse
can't be, "I'm only as good as
my sources."
Now, if you have... if you've
talked to everyone and exhausted
every possible avenue, then you
can say that.
But no reporter ever does that.
So if... if your sources are
wrong, you're wrong, and you
have to accept responsibility.
>> INTERVIEWER: You believed
there was W.M.D. in Iraq?
>> I did.
>> INTERVIEWER: You said as much
publicly?
>> Yes.
>> What happens if we go to war
against Iraq and we find no
weapons of mass destruction?
>> I think the chance of that
happening is about zero.
There's just too much there.
When I say the chances are about
zero, that's the way it looked.
It was totally wrong.
I think I dropped the ball here.
I should've pushed much, much
harder.
>> INTERVIEWER: Harder on the
skepticism about the reality of
W.M.D.?
>> Yes.
In other words, said, "Hey,
look, the evidence is not as
strong as they were claiming."
>> No terrorist state poses a
greater or more immediate threat
to the security of our people
than the regime of Saddam
Hussein in Iraq.
>> An al-Qaeda-type network
trained and armed by Saddam
could attack America and leave
not one fingerprint.
>> We have firsthand
descriptions of biological
weapons factories on wheels.
>> We don't want the smoking gun
to be a mushroom cloud.
>> NARRATOR: Many in the media
got the W.M.D. story wrong.
Frontline aired its own report
on the possible threats of
Saddam's weapons programs.
>> When a man known as Saddam's
bomb maker went to work...
>> The way that the press was
sold and spun and turned around
and just fooled by the White
House in the run-up to the war
represents more than just a
missed story.
How can one say that we have a
watchdog press after a
performance like that?
>> NARRATOR: In fact, there was
some W.M.D. reporting that did
get the story right.
>> What we were doing was
following reporting.
And good solid reporting was
telling us one thing, and that's
what we wrote.
>> NARRATOR: Clark Hoyt was
Knight Ridder's Washington
editor during the run-up to the
war in Iraq.
>> What we were hearing from
very good sources was really
nothing has changed with Iraq.
>> NARRATOR: But as they
continued their skeptical
reporting, Hoyt says they began
to feel heat from the
government.
>> Someone in the Defense
Department called our reporter a
communistic Bolshevik.
l;;;;jump
Others said, "You know, all you
guys have in this town is your
reputation and your credibility,
and we're going to get you, and
we're going to get that."
I will say at times it seemed
very lonely because you kept
looking around saying, "Where's
everybody else?"
>> NARRATOR: The Washington
Post had reporters who had also
begun hearing doubts about the
evidence of W.M.D. in the final
days before war.
>> I started calling people I
knew in the Pentagon and finally
got somebody who just honestly
said, "We don't know where they
are.
We don't know if they are
there."
And then somebody in the agency
did the Potemkin village idea,
that Saddam Hussein was making
believe he had the stuff when he
didn't.
That led up to the piece two
days before the war that it
might not be there.
>> NARRATOR: Pincus' story ran
on page 13.
The lead headline of the Post
that day was: "President Tells
Hussein to Leave Iraq Within 48
Hours or Face Invasion."
By the beginning of May 2003,
Baghdad had fallen.
>> Major combat operations in
Iraq have ended.
In the battle of Iraq, the
United States and our allies
have prevailed.
>> NARRATOR: The President
landed aboard the "U.S.S.
Lincoln."
>> Operation Iraqi Freedom was
carried out with a combination
of precision and speed and
boldness the enemy did not
expect and the world had not
seen before.
>> The Pentagon announced the
dispatch of a 1,300-member
search team.
Senior officers in Iraq are
puzzled.
>> Things could have been taken
and buried, they could have been
transported or they could have
been destroyed.
>> Enough already.
Where are the weapons of mass
destruction?
>> NARRATOR: By the summer of
2003, the news media were
raising questions about Saddam's
W.M.D.
>> 17 U.S. troops have been
killed in ambushes in Iraq since
President Bush...
>> NARRATOR: The news about the
war grew more violent by the
day.
>> Would the American people
have been so supportive going to
war absent the weapons of mass
destruction argument?
>> Do you believe that the
administration oversold the
weapons of mass destruction
problem?
>> NARRATOR: And in the middle
of that summer, a new critic
emerged.
In an op-ed in the New York
Times, a former ambassador
raised doubts about a claim made
by the President.
>> The British government has
learned that Saddam Hussein
recently sought significant
quantities of uranium from
Africa.
>> INTERVIEWER: When you heard
the remarks of the President in
his State of the Union address,
were you listening to it?
>> I was, yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: What was your
reaction when you heard those
remarks live?
>> I assumed that the
countries... the country to
which the President was
referring was not Niger.
>> NARRATOR: Joseph Wilson wrote
that the Vice President's office
had raised questions about this
alleged Niger uranium deal and
that the C.I.A. had asked him to
look into it.
He says that he found no
evidence of a deal.
>> A misstatement of fundamental
fact which supported the
justification for the invasion
of a sovereign nation was in the
President's State of the Union
address.
This administration failed to
correct the record.
>> NARRATOR: Wilson decided to
correct the record himself.
First, he agreed to talk
confidentially to two reporters.
>> I had not wanted my name used
in this.
It was not to hide my own role
from my own government, but
rather to make sure that all
their attack dogs did not get an
early opportunity to try and
trash me.
>> INTERVIEWER: So why did you
decide to go public?
>> Because it became apparent in
June that the administration was
just going to continue to
stonewall.
>> Can you explain how an
erroneous piece of intelligence
on the Iraq-Niger connection got
into your State of the Union
speech?
And should somebody be held
accountable, sir?
>> I gave a speech to the nation
that was cleared by the
intelligence services.
>> NARRATOR: Five days after
Wilson's op-ed, the C.I.A. took
responsibility for not removing
the faulty claim from Bush's
speech.
>> Sir, how did it get into your
speech if it was erroneous?
>> NARRATOR: Days later,
conservative columnist Robert
Novak came out with his own
column.
Novak contradicted the
impression that Cheney had been
responsible for Wilson's trip to
Niger, writing that two Bush
administration officials said
Wilson had been sent at the
suggestion of his wife, C.I.A.
operative Valerie Plame.
>> For an administration that
came to office...
>> NARRATOR: Wilson was all over
the news...
>> Senior officials in the White
House...
>> NARRATOR: ...charging the
White House with outing his
wife, an undercover C.I.A.
officer...
>> It is gratuitous.
It is a gratuitous smear.
>> NARRATOR: ...to punish him
for his dissent.
>> INTERVIEWER: So this was
hardball politics, basically.
>> It's something they're well
known for, absolutely.
>> Wilson suspects the leak was
deliberate, a reprisal for his
challenge...
>> NARRATOR: The story played as
a potentially devastating
scandal for the White House.
>> The Bush White House is
facing a potential criminal
investigation.
>> NARRATOR: Revealing Plame's
identity to the press may have
been a violation of the law.
>> The prosecutors and agents
who are and will be handling
this investigation are career
professionals...
>> NARRATOR: The Justice
Department was called on to open
a leak investigation.
>> ...in matters involving
sensitive national security
information.
>> INTERVIEWER: Your office got
the referral in the Valerie
Plame case?
>> Yes.
The F.B.I. runs leak
investigations when those leaks
involve classified information.
>> INTERVIEWER: How do you
conduct these investigations?
I mean, we read about them in
the paper, but we have no idea
actually what goes on.
>> Well, first of all, you have
a victim agency, the owner of
the information, those who
classified it.
What they have to do is file a
report which consists of 11
questions.
And those questions go from:
"Was the material properly
classified?"
"Was the information that was
leaked accurate compared to what
the actual classified
information is?"
>> INTERVIEWER: The information
has to be accurate?
>> Yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: So when the
government announces a leak
investigation and it comes to
your office, it's confirming
that the... that the report in
the newspaper, for example, or
on television was true?
>> In... yes.
Indirectly, yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: That's one way
to fact check.
>> Behind the showdown is an
investigation into whether
someone in the White House
illegally leaked the name of...
>> ...claims the leak came as
payback.
Libby and Karl Rove have been
identified by other reporters as
discussing the case.
>> NARRATOR: The question was
who had leaked to Novak, and
suspicions reached the highest
levels of the White House.
Was it Karl Rove?
The Vice-President's chief of
staff, Lewis "Scooter" Libby?
Cheney himself?
>> Listen, I don't know of
anybody in my administration who
leaked classified information.
If somebody did leak classified
information, I'd like to know
it, and we'll take the
appropriate action.
>> NARRATOR: Quickly dubbed
"Plamegate," the Plame Affair
became a media spectacle.
>> The Bush White House is so
secretive and hidden that people
thought, "Oh, this is going to
be the issue that will pry it
open."
People have written that there
were the echoes of Watergate.
>> Mr. President, on another
issue, the C.I.A. Leakgate, what
do you say to critics of the
administration who say that this
administration retaliates
against naysayers?
>> Yeah.
Well, first of all, I'm glad you
brought that question up.
>> The real issue in the summer
of 2003 was we'd been in Iraq
for three or four months and
hadn't found any weapons of mass
destruction.
That was the real story.
>> Two things, I think, the
administration hyped.
One was the connection to al-
Qaeda, and, two, their absolute
certainty that they had some
sense that they knew where these
weapons were.
>> That was just pulsing in the
background of all of this.
>> Now I see the Justice
Department is now starting to
investigate.
Now, isn't that a sweetheart
deal?
Attorney General John Ashcroft,
appointed by this President,
investigating the President.
>> NARRATOR: In Congress,
Democrats demanded a Special
Prosecutor take over the case.
>> ...do this investigation as
independent from the political
appointees in the Justice
Department as possible.
>> NARRATOR: And some in the
media agreed.
>> INTERVIEWER: The New York
Times editorialized for a
special counsel.
>> Yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: And eventually
Attorney General Ashcroft
stepped aside.
>> Yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: It's kind of
ironic?
>> Be careful what you wish for.
Be careful what you editorialize
for.
>> NARRATOR: This is who they
got.
Known as a tough, nonpartisan
career prosecutor, Patrick
Fitzgerald was appointed to take
over the investigation.
As he looked for the leaker,
Fitzgerald decided the only way
he could determine if a crime
had been committed was to get
the testimony of the journalists
involved.
It had turned out that Novak
wasn't the only one who had been
given the information about
Plame.
>> It is clear that at least
four of us were talked to in the
same way.
After Joe Wilson's column in the
Times and his interview in the
Post, which got buried in the
back of the paper, at least four
of us were given roughly the
same story: the wife arranged
for the trip-- to undermine the
trip, and that doesn't happen ad
hoc.
So I think there was a plan to
do that.
>> INTERVIEWER: A conspiracy to
manipulate the press?
>> Or, as I put it, it's damage
control.
They're not the first
administration to do it.
I don't think they violated the
law, but they gave an opening to
people to make that allegation.
>> NARRATOR: Among those
contacted by Fitzgerald was
Time magazine's Matthew Cooper.
Cooper had reported on the
magazine's web site that
government officials had told
him that Valerie Plame was a
C.I.A. official.
His primary source, Cooper's
bosses knew, was Karl Rove.
>> The conversations that Matt
Cooper was having about Valerie
Plame's identity did not strike
me as out of the ordinary.
I was frankly trying to figure
out why a special counsel was
needed, what the law was that
was broken, why a grand jury was
called and why we were being
subpoenaed.
>> INTERVIEWER: Because you just
thought this is the way things
go and this is how you report in
Washington?
>> Well, first of... well, not
only in Washington.
Leaks and use of anonymous
sources is very much in the
fabric of American journalism
today.
The places where it's most
obvious are in Washington and
Hollywood, on Wall Street and in
sports.
>> It's important in
understanding the Plame case to
understand how anonymous
sourcing has changed over the
last generation.
During Watergate, and before
that, confidentiality was a tool
that journalists would offer to
reluctant sources to coax them
to come forward.
That has shifted to the point
where confidentiality and
anonymity are conditions that
the source often imposes on the
journalist.
To the public, the whistle
blower who is Deep Throat
reluctantly guiding an
investigative reporter is very
different than a high-ranking
administration official lunching
in an elegant Washington hotel,
spinning a reporter with the
protection of confidentiality.
That's the powerful trying to
get their message out to other
elites through elite media, and
that's what occurred in the
Plame case.
That's the powerful trying to
>> NARRATOR: Among the powerful
now in the sights of the
investigation was Scooter Libby.
Fitzgerald subpoenaed the New
York Times' Judith Miller,
having learned that Libby had
spoken to her, and Miller had
refused to cooperate.
>> We can't begin to say, "I'm
only going to issue pledges of
confidentiality when politically
I agree with the source or I
think the source isn't... isn't
politically motivated."
I mean, almost all leaks of
information are politically
motivated.
>> The law can't and shouldn't
distinguish, and I would say
journalists can't and shouldn't
distinguish between what, good
sources and bad?
>> NARRATOR: Long-time First
Amendment lawyer Floyd Abrams
was retained by the New York
Times to represent Miller.
>> If we're going to have a
political litmus test, then
we're not talking about
principle at all.
Then we're just talking about,
you know, is this a good way to
get the Bush administration, or
is this a good way to... to help
the Bush administration?
Nothing to do with... with
matters of principle.
>> NARRATOR: The principle was
protecting your source no matter
what.
Cooper and Miller said they were
prepared to go to jail rather
than testify.
>> Once you break the... a
confidential source
relationship, there's every
reason for every source in the
future to not believe it when
you say, "We will keep you in
confidential source."
One, it's a slippery slope.
Once you... once you break that
confidentiality once, it... it
harms our reporting from now on.
>> NARRATOR: But Fitzgerald was
changing the playing field with
a novel technique to get
reporters to talk.
Waivers had been distributed to
potential sources in the White
House, releasing reporters from
their pledge of confidentiality.
And then the waivers were
presented to the reporters and
their publications.
>> INTERVIEWER: Did you feel
that the kinds of releases that
the special prosecutor got from
the White House were sufficient?
>> Our lawyers talked...
No, that would not have been
sufficient.
Our lawyers talked to lawyers
for the individuals involved to
satisfy us that the... that the
release was voluntary, personal,
directly from that individual,
specifically about what it was
that we were asked to testify
about.
>> We were told the source had
come forward, had identified
himself as the one who talked to
me about it, and had released me
to talk to the prosecutor about
it if, at the same time, I never
mentioned his name publicly.
And I never have.
>> INTERVIEWER: But you did
testify?
>> I gave a deposition, yeah.
>> INTERVIEWER: Well, which is
testimony.
So...
>> Yeah.
Didn't go...
>> INTERVIEWER: Sworn testimony.
>> ...to the grand jury.
It wasn't as dramatic as all
that.
And I was never asked to
identify my source, and I never
did because the prosecutor knew
who the source was.
One of the agreements with the
prosecutor was I wouldn't be
asked.
>> INTERVIEWER: That was to save
you from losing your virginity
or something?
>> Yeah.
It's something I felt very
strongly about.
>> Some of our people have given
very limited depositions in
which they have not revealed any
confidential sources nor in any
other way violated our ethics.
Very, very narrow testimony.
>> INTERVIEWER: But put yourself
in the position of someone who
sees a newspaper providing their
reporters to give testimony,
however smart the negotiation
is.
>> It's not that just the
negotiations are smart.
You're really... you're really
evading the principle here.
The principle here is that we
have not revealed confidential
sources.
>> Hell, no, we won't go!
Hell, no, we won't go!
>> NARRATOR: The battle over
confidential sources is an old
one.
It came to a head during another
era when the government and the
press were at war.
>> In the pro and con over the
riots one thing was certain.
Major social reforms were
needed.
>> NARRATOR: In California, a
young reporter would find
himself in the middle of this
war.
>> I went to California in the
fall of 1968.
And really, my primary job,
my... almost my entire job for
that period as a national
correspondent with the New York
Times was to cover the Black
Panther parties.
There was genuine concern in
America that black Americans
were headed towards some kind of
violent confrontation with
government.
And then came this group of very
young people in their
militaristic uniforms, black
berets, black leather jackets.
But most of all, they were
embracing the gun.
My job was to... my editor
wanted me to get on the inside,
tell us where they going, what
does this mean?
>> There's little hope of
avoiding open armed war in the
streets of California and
preventing it from sweeping
across this nation.
>> The Black Panthers posed a
real threat.
In their time, they were as
serious as terrorist groups
would be today.
>> INTERVIEWER: And that was the
law enforcement view.
>> That was the fact.
There were different members of
the Black Panthers that were
tried for various crimes,
convicted of various crimes.
They were one of the many
subjects of concern at the time.
>> NARRATOR: Concerned about the
Black Panthers' activities, the
F.B.I. turned to Earl Caldwell.
>> The F.B.I. called me and
asked if I would have regular
meetings informally with agents.
They said, "We know that you're
over there all the time and
you're seeing what's happening,
and you're all around with them.
And we'd like you just to tell
us what's going on, sort of be
our eyes and ears on the
inside."
And I told them, of course, I
couldn't do that.
I can't... can't even have this
conversation with you.
>> NARRATOR: Eventually, the
F.B.I. told Caldwell that he
might have information about a
possible crime.
>> The F.B.I. said that the
Panthers had made a threat to
the President.
I did have the quotes about that
in my story.
The Panthers were saying, "And
we recognize the government is
being oppressive, and we have
our duty, obligation to bear
arms against the government."
>> NARRATOR: But Caldwell
refused to cooperate with the
F.B.I.
>> They persisted in it.
And then one day, they said,
"Tell Earl Caldwell we're not
playing with him.
He doesn't want to talk to us,
he can tell it in court."
This was, like, on a Friday.
On a Monday, they... they had...
( chuckles )
...they had issue... came back
with a subpoena.
>> NARRATOR: Caldwell fought the
subpoena up to the Ninth Circuit
Court of Appeals.
>> My lawyer argued that "You're
going to destroy this reporter."
He talked about how reporters
could bring back and answer and
tell America about these
questions that were so large at
that time.
He argued that the First
Amendment, this is precisely
what it protects-- not just
information, but the process.
We won a unanimous...
( chuckles )
...we won a unanimous decision
from the United States Court of
Appeals.
>> NARRATOR: The government
appealed the decision to the
Supreme Court where Caldwell's
case was joined by two others,
and the case became famous,
commonly referred to as
Branzburg.
>> We talk about the Branzburg
case.
To me, it's not the Branzburg
case; it's my case, it's the
Caldwell case, but anyway...
>> NARRATOR: At the time, James
Goodale was General Counsel for
the New York Times.
>> This case became a case of
the press standing up to the
government.
We're the press, we're over
here.
This information is ours.
You're over there, the
government, and the twain shall
never meet.
>> INTERVIEWER: The press is not
an arm of law enforcement.
>> Sure.
The... the press can't be the
arm of law enforcement because
if it is, there's no ability for
the public, for which the press
is a surrogate, to criticize the
government and look into what
the government's done wrong.
>> I don't begrudge them from
standing on their principle, but
I think that there's on the
other side another principle
that is equally important, which
is, if there's criminal conduct
out there that you or I or
anybody else knows about, you
darn well ought to get that
information to the people who
are in charge of law
enforcement.
>> NARRATOR: William Bradford
Reynolds was a government lawyer
who argued against the reporters
before the Supreme Court in
Branzburg.
>> The reporter's mantra is
"It's the public's right to
know."
I think that the public has a
right to know.
I... I also believe that if the
reporter has... knows the
identity of somebody who's
committed a crime, the public
has a right to know that just as
much.
>> The court also ruled today
that newsmen are not immune from
being summoned before a grand
jury and being forced to answer
questions.
>> NARRATOR: In a 5-4 decision,
the Supreme Court ruled against
the reporters.
>> Branzburg answered the
question, is there a
constitutional protection here
for reporters?
And it said no, there is not.
There is no testimonial
privilege that is available to
the reporters that protects them
from testifying anymore than
there is one that would protect
me as a private citizen from
testifying.
>> I just wasn't going to buy
that... buy that argument, so...
>> INTERVIEWER: What do you
mean, you weren't going to buy
the argument?
>> Well, it's...
>> INTERVIEWER: It's called the
Supreme Court for a reason.
>> I know, but there's always a
way, you know.
I could not, as a practical
matter, go back to my pals in
the newsroom and say, "I can't
protect you because the Supreme
Court has taken all your
protection."
You can't do that.
So I sent my family away, locked
myself into a room in my
apartment.
The air conditioning was turned
off, and I sweated out five
pounds and a theory how the
Branzburg case actually created
a reporter's privilege for
reporters, even though it seemed
to have done the exact opposite.
>> NARRATOR: The key to
Goodale's argument was Justice
Lewis Powell.
>> Powell says effectively,
"Okay, I'm with you against the
press on this case, but in other
cases, there should be an
ability for the press to deal
with the subpoenas."
He didn't spell out exactly what
he meant.
So I said, "Well, look, if this
other case is... he's one and
I've got four over here.
Last time I knew, that made
five, and that's more than the
four that voted against me.
So if I get another case that is
perhaps a little different than
Caldwell's case, I will argue
that those five votes create a
reporter's privilege."
>> The Times intends to continue
fighting for its reporters'
right to keep their sources
confidential, fighting both in
the courts and through state or
federal legislation.
>> Our theory was go back and
fight this thing out state by
state by state by state until we
end up with enough body of law
so that there's protection for
reporters.
>> NARRATOR: As Goodale set to
work, it was a heady time for
reporters.
The Watergate reporting had
helped take down a president,
and the value of anonymous
sources was never more clear.
>> It would have been totally
impossible to have done the
Watergate reporting and
identified our sources.
>> INTERVIEWER: Weren't you
subpoenaed during Watergate?
>> Yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: For your
sources?
>> Yes.
There was a suit brought for the
purpose of getting to us, among
other things.
And so we were subpoenaed.
And the strategy had been gone
over with the lawyers.
Our notes, my notes were
transferred to the custody of
Katharine Graham, the publisher
of the Washington Post.
>> We called that the
"grandmother defense" because if
we suddenly gave all our
documents to a woman who was in
her 60s, then, you know, instead
of Bernstein and Woodward,
Katharine Graham is a whole lot
better possessor on all... a lot
more important witness.
>> As Bradlee said, "Wouldn't
that be something?
Every photographer in town would
be down at the courthouse to
look at our girl going off to
the slam."
And Mrs. Graham was ready to go
to jail because she understood
the principle.
>> The principle is this: the
government has all kinds of ways
to get information-- it can
eavesdrop, it can wiretap,
legally, it can offer immunity
to criminals in order to get
them to testify.
What is the essential route to
get information by the press?
And that is to offer a
confidentiality.
So when people say, "Well,
nobody should be above the law,"
spouses are above the law.
They don't have to give the
testimony against their spouse.
Lawyers don't have to.
Why?
Because there is a social,
judicial benefit to having
confidence imbued in certain
relationships.
>> Hi, I'm Bob Woodward of the
Washington Post.
>> Yes, yes.
What is it?
>> NARRATOR: By the mid-1970s,
journalists played as heroes in
the popular imagination.
>> You tell me what you know,
and I'll confirm.
>> What you had was a sea change
in historical and social terms,
in terms of the news media.
People often think that judges
are born in robes, and they
issue their decisions as if from
like Moses, coming down from the
Ten Commandments.
But they don't.
Judges operate in a historical
and a social context.
And judges all across the
country were very much affected
by Watergate.
>> NARRATOR: And James Goodale
was finding new success in his
legal battle.
>> We came up with this idea
that we, the reporters, should
have a privilege, namely the
reporters' privilege, not to
cough up this information every
time the government wants it.
>> NARRATOR: Across the country,
reporters went to jail to
protect their sources.
And over the next decade, many
states passed legislation and
lower courts ruled to protect
journalists.
Today, 49 states recognize some
degree of a reporter's
privilege.
>> Some very creative media
lawyers led by Jim Goodale were
able to convince many judges,
and we had a certain level of
success over the years in
getting subpoenas knocked out in
civil cases and in... in
criminal trials.
>> NARRATOR: Though there's
never been a federal law
establishing a reporter's
privilege, the Justice
Department uses a set of
guidelines in its decision to
subpoena journalists.
>> The guidelines are very
clear.
A media subpoena should only be
sought when all other avenues of
investigation have been
foreclosed, and only in exigent
circumstances.
And exigent circumstances were
explained to me to be grave
national security matters.
>> INTERVIEWER: Emergencies.
>> Yeah, emergencies.
>> INTERVIEWER: Life and death.
>> Life and death.
>> NARRATOR: Mark Corallo was
working in Attorney General John
Ashcroft's Justice Department
when the Plame investigation
began.
Though Ashcroft was never asked
to subpoena any reporters in the
case, Corallo says it's unlikely
that he would have.
He says he never saw Ashcroft
approve a subpoena of a reporter
for confidential sources in the
time he worked there.
>> We were committed to not
issuing one of these subpoenas.
>> INTERVIEWER: To the liberals
out there watching, Attorney
General Ashcroft always said no?
>> Attorney General Ashcroft
always said no.
>> INTERVIEWER: "Do not subpoena
the journalists."
>> Correct.
>> NARRATOR: But in the Plame
case, Patrick Fitzgerald was
determined to get reporters to
cooperate.
He had worked out deals to get
four reporters to testify.
Matthew Cooper and Judith Miller
had refused, and the reporters
had another problem.
Just as the Plame affair had
begun, in an unrelated case, a
federal judge in Chicago had
dropped a bombshell.
>> Judge Richard Posner, who's a
very influential judge, said, "I
just wanted to be clear that
I've reread the Branzburg case,
and all you judges out there
who've been saying for the last
30 years that Branzburg provides
some sort of privilege are
wrong.
There is no privilege in
Branzburg, period."
>> He caused a lot of trouble
because he said, "Look, there's
another way to look at it other
than what all these lawyers have
done.
A reporter's got to testify."
>> INTERVIEWER: Well, the other
way to look at it, is the court
ruled 5-4, there is no
privilege...
>> There's no privilege.
>> INTERVIEWER: ...and Powell
was just saying it'd be nice if
Congress passed a law or
somebody did something to
protect...
>> Yeah.
Well, Powell was just blowing
smoke.
>> INTERVIEWER: Right.
And you had taken the smoke and
made it appear to be real.
>> Yeah.
Right.
>> INTERVIEWER: That's what he's
saying.
He called your bluff.
>> Yeah.
Well, I don't think it's a
bluff, with all due respect.
>> NARRATOR: Bluff or no bluff,
Cooper and Miller were forcing
the question: would the courts
back their decision not to
testify?
>> My standard for cooperation
was very high.
It was different from other
people's.
Everybody has to make that call
themselves.
But I knew what I could live
with and what I couldn't live
with.
>> Judy Miller's attitude about
this was that it was important
for at least someone to stand up
and fight even if she wound up
losing.
>> NARRATOR: The reporters did
lose.
The Supreme Court refused to
hear the case, and the final
word was left with a lower
court.
>> INTERVIEWER: The Appellate
Court in that case spoke
directly, spoke very, very
clearly, and said Branzburg
stands.
>> That's what they said.
There's no ambiguity at all.
That there is no protection, the
Court of Appeals in Washington
said, for journalists in... in
situations in which a grand jury
seeks information in good faith
from a journalist, period.
>> INTERVIEWER: Is it possible
that given the bad facts in this
case and given the decision to,
in a sense, fight this on
principle that in the end what
you did was make bad law?
>> It's possible.
It's possible.
>> INTERVIEWER: You got the
Appellate Court to reaffirm
Branzburg, which Goodale and...
your friend Goodale and allies
have been trying to avoid a
decision like that for decades.
>> Yeah.
It just seems to me that there
are some fights which have to be
fought.
And sometimes they have to be
fought even if chances of
winning are... are slight.
>> NARRATOR: On July 6, 2005,
Matthew Cooper headed into the
D.C. District Court where he
would agree to testify.
>> What do we want?
>> Free press!
>> When do we want it?
>> Now!
>> NARRATOR: Pearlstine and
Time magazine had given
Fitzgerald Cooper's notes.
>> INTERVIEWER: Your reporter,
Matt Cooper, he wasn't happy
with your giving up his notes.
>> He disagreed with me.
He wished that I hadn't done so.
He viewed his conversation with
Rove as a confidential exchange
that ought to be protected.
He disagreed with me about it,
and I think he would have been
prepared to go to jail himself.
>> It is a sad time when two
journalists were simply doing
their jobs and trying to keep
confidences and report important
stories face the prospect of
going to prison for keeping
those confidences.
>> It's the most difficult
decision I've had to make in
more than three decades in
journalism.
And I say that with the
understanding that lots of
people whom I respect and admire
would disagree with me.
>> Disgraceful.
Absolutely disgraceful.
I've talked about this with...
with Norman.
We have a civilized
disagreement.
Norman Pearlstine is in a very
difficult political position in
real life because he has to go
to his board of directors, who
are not First Amendment-niks and
maybe not even media people who
know a lot about media, and tell
them that he's going to go in
civil contempt.
I think, as a practical matter,
that is very difficult for him.
>> As usual with Jim, a little
learning is a dangerous thing.
I never went to the board.
I made the decision on my own in
my capacity as editor-in-chief
of Time, Inc.
In this particular case,
involving a grand jury,
involving a question of national
security, involving White House
officials who are not
traditional whistleblowers but
if anything were trying to
undermine a whistleblower, and a
situation where the name of the
source was in our e-mail and
available to several dozen
people within Time, Inc., it
seemed to me that as an
institution we had no choice but
to turn over our notes in this
case.
>> NARRATOR: Because the New
York Times had not been in
possession of Miller's notes,
the government did not pursue a
subpoena against the Times.
>> Are you confident justice
will prevail on this one?
>> NARRATOR: The decision to
cooperate or not was up to
Miller, and the paper stood by
her.
>> Good luck, good luck.
>> Thank you.
>> Yeah, go get 'em.
>> The underlying principle that
we try to protect our sources
including against subpoenas
before grand juries is a good
principle, but it's a very, very
hard one to explain to... to the
general public given both the
problematic nature of the
reporter and the problematic
nature of the leak.
I think everybody wished that it
was a cleaner case.
>> INTERVIEWER: But do you ever
really get to choose?
>> No.
Which is why we ended up, you
know, fighting this one as best
we could.
>> NARRATOR: When Miller refused
to testify, she was shackled and
taken out the rear of the
courtroom into a waiting police
van, where she was driven to the
Alexandria Detention Center in
Virginia.
>> Here's a reporter who's not
well-liked, generally, by the
press establishment, who
suddenly takes a position that
is heroic to the press
establishment.
>> Arianna Huffington, you wrote
that Miller doesn't want to
reveal her source at the White
House because she is the source.
>> It was so complicated that
there were even wags inside the
New York Times who speculated
that Judith Miller never had any
sources.
>> "Miller's no fool.
She understood the lesson of the
Martha Stewart case: when you
find yourself covered with mud,
there's nothing like a brief
stint in a minimum security
prison to restore your old
luster."
What a nasty...
>> Definitely seems to be true.
>> But what a nasty thing to
write.
>> INTERVIEWER: There's
definitely a group of people who
felt that you were becoming a
martyr, that you were doing this
to make up for the problems with
the W.M.D. coverage.
>> I didn't feel that I had
anything to apologize for with
my W.M.D. coverage.
I knew why I was in jail, and I
knew that I was in jail for a
cause that I thought was
essential to our profession.
So I was very comfortable with
the decision.
But was it painful?
Yes.
Was it disappointing?
Was it infuriating sometimes?
Yes.
>> NARRATOR: On September 29,
2005, after 85 days in jail,
Judith Miller finally made a
deal to provide limited
testimony and was freed.
>> I heard directly from my
source that I should testify
before the grand jury.
>> NARRATOR: Soon after, she and
the New York Times would part
ways.
>> When we finally ended up
relenting and Judy ended up
testifying, I felt like we may
have been a little too quick to
charge out on the... on the limb
and... and vociferously defend
the principle.
I mean, there's, you know, part
of me that wonders whether we
might have gotten a deal at the
beginning comparable to the one
that we got at the end.
>> INTERVIEWER: Sounds like
something you regret, the whole
situation.
>> Well, there's certainly
aspects of it I regret.
I'm... you know, the principle
is the principle.
And... and I'm... I'm... I would
rather work at a place, you
know, that stands up for that
principle than one that doesn't.
>> On July 2003, the fact that
Valerie Wilson was a C.I.A.
officer was classified.
Not only was it classified but
it was not widely known outside
the intelligence community.
>> NARRATOR: On October 28,
2005, almost two years after
taking over the case, Special
Prosecutor Patrick Fitzgerald
faced the media.
>> Valerie Wilson's cover was
blown in July 2003.
>> NARRATOR: In the end, no one
was charged with outing Valerie
Plame.
>> Mr. Novak was not the first
reporter.
>> NARRATOR: Instead, the Vice
President's chief of staff,
Scooter Libby, was indicted on
charges of perjury and
obstruction of justice.
>> In fact, Mr. Libby was the
first official known to have
told a reporter when he talked
to Judith Miller in June of 2003
about Valerie Wilson.
>> NARRATOR: But it would turn
out there was still more to the
story.
The Plame investigation had one
last twist.
>> When Fitzgerald said that
Judy Miller was the first to
learn about this from Scooter
Libby, the Vice President's
chief of staff, I realized I was
the first to learn about it.
>> NARRATOR: Woodward's leaker
was also the primary source for
Novak's column, the
administration official who blew
Plame's cover in the first
place.
>> Novak wrote he learned of it
from somebody who is not a
partisan gunslinger.
It was an offhand remark.
That's exactly the way I learned
it.
>> NARRATOR: The leak had not
come from Bush's inner circle,
but from a dissenter who had
questioned the administration's
march to war: then Deputy
Secretary of State Richard
Armitage.
>> It was a classic case of
doing a long interview and
Armitage gossiping at the end.
There was a lot of energy and
airtime and ink spent over
something that really didn't
amount to a violation of the
law.
There is no echo of Watergate.
>> Jury selection got underway
today in the criminal trial of
Scooter Libby...
>> Jurors were shown the Cheney
talking points...
>> NARRATOR: With the Libby
trial back in the news, details
are emerging about the extent to
which the Vice President's
office directed the effort to
discredit Joseph Wilson.
>> The Vice President and
Scooter Libby were discussing
the Wilsons almost every day for
two weeks...
>> INTERVIEWER: What are we to
make of Joe Wilson and his
complaint that the government of
the United States retaliated
against him?
Do you believe that the White
House was out to get him?
>> Yeah, and guess what?
Joe Wilson, move over.
The White House is out to get a
lot of people.
And every White House is.
It's part of the tug of war of
policy that you try to advance
your interests and undermine
your opponents'.
If you're going to start
criminalizing those kind of
leaks, which is what the
nation's capital is based on,
you're going to be throwing an
awful lot of reporters in jail
and maybe some... an awful lot
of government officials.
>> The British government has
learned that Saddam Hussein
recently sought...
>> NARRATOR: What started as a
campaign to spin the press on
the road to war...
>> We know for a fact that there
are weapons there.
>> NARRATOR: ...became a muddled
story about official leaks,
political hardball and questions
about a cover-up at the highest
level of the White House.
But in the end, the lasting
effect of what was called
"Plamegate" may be what it means
for the institution of the
press.
>> I think the Bush
administration saw that a top
reporter for the number-one
newspaper in this country could
go to jail for weeks and nothing
would happen, in essence.
And I think that emboldened them
to go after the press in other
cases, as they have, threaten
other reporters with jail, as
they have, because they saw this
as a green light.
They saw this, that they could
get away with it.
And now it's, "Katie, bar the
door."
>> NARRATOR: Next week on
Frontline, the battles
continues...
>> INTERVIEWER: So you're ready
to go to prison?
>> Well, "ready" is perhaps not
the appropriate word.
>> For 30 or more years, there
had been a certain assumption
about the government and the
press.
And suddenly, in the last couple
of years, that's changed.
>> INTERVIEWER: How did you
first find out that the F.B.I.
was interested in what you may
have shot?
>> NARRATOR: ...government
secrets exposed...
>> It used to be that you could
depend upon the moral character
of news media and the commitment
and loyalty to the United
States.
>> There can be no excuse for
anyone entrusted with vital
intelligence to leak it, and no
excuse for any newspaper to
print it.
>> NARRATOR: ...and the White
House fights back.
>> It's the President of the
United States saying, "If you
publish this story, you will
have blood on your hands."
>> NARRATOR: Next time on
Frontline, part two of News
War.
>> This report continues on
Frontline's web site, where you
can watch the full program
again online; access a database
of dozens of interviews with
journalists, editors and
scholars; read about the rights
and responsibilities of the
press...
>> If your sources are wrong,
you're wrong.
>> ...and what the Plame case
revealed about Washington's
culture of reporting.
>> The press was sold and spun
and turned around and just
fooled.
>> Then join the discussion at
pbs.org.
>> Funding for Frontline is
provided by:
The Park Foundation--
committed to raising public
awareness.
With major funding for News War
from the Richard and Rhoda
Goldman Foundation.
And additional funding from the
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.